For my final project I want to create a visualization of the advanced encryption standard algorithm. I have some knowledge in about the history of cryptography and ciphers but have never programmed one myself. I am interested in exploring the AES algorithm since two of my prime interests in CS are web development and security and AES is almost the epitome of the intersection of the two sectors.
For a rough timeline of the project, I believe by the end of week one I should have the encryption implementation up and running and should have started on the decryption part. By the end of week two I hope to be done with visualizing the encryption of a value with a key and hopefully have finished the decryption part of the algorithm as well. For week three, I plan to finish implementing the visualization of the decryption of a message and make it interactive my having people type their own message and hitting a button to encrypt or decrypt what they have typed.
If I were to finish the project early, the most I would spend my time on is improving the visualization. In my opinion, one of the coolest parts about AES is the column and row shifting using matrix manipulation. The algorithm is one of the best demonstrations of the power of linear algebra and the visualization I think would be cool to look at. Making edges in the display smoother and things less boxy would be a goal.
Testing of the algorithm itself I believe will be quite straight forward, since there are already test vectors out there that given a known key, the expected result is known. I just need to compare the cipher my code gives compared to known good code. The goal is not to implement the most efficient AES algorithm, but implement the AES algorithm in a way that I can understand the process enough to be able to make a visualization of it. A stretch goal would be to implement all variants of the AES algorithm using both 128-bit, 196-bit, and 256-bit keys and then letting the user choose how long to make their key. However, at the moment, I am only planning on implementing the 128-bit one.
